Create GOVERNANCE.md (#1)
haskell-cryptography/governance: GOVERNANCE.md

# Governance

`haskell-cryptography` (herein referred to as the "Organisation") is a GitHub organisation that aims to provide a support structure to open-source maintainers producing cryptography libraries.

This document elaborates on administrative and operational aspects of the Organisation.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Summary

The organisation intends to allow package maintainers to maintain control of their packages, if they wish to, while making it easier to bring together effort to improve the state of cryptography in the Haskell ecosystem. 
```

## Administrative aspect

> The Organisation's administrative aspects are handled by the Core Team. While a healthy overlap is appreciated between the Core Team and the contributors,

Reviewer: I think _Core Team_ needs to be defined - who is it, who decides who it on it? What is their relationship to the group of maintainers of the various repos in the organisation?

Author: Core Team is an actual team in the GitHub Organisation. When it comes to who's on it, that's a more difficult thing to get not-too-wrong and will probably take a bit more time to refine.

> An employee of the Haskell Foundation has a position in the Core Team as to facilitate ecosystem-related matters and discussion with other institutional parties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
an employee of the Haskell Foundation has a position in the Core Team as to facilitate ecosystem-related matters and discussion with other institutional parties.
```

Reviewer: It should also be made clear exactly what the Haskell Foundation's role is here. Are they decision makers? it's not quite clear.

Author: Got it.

> An employee of the Haskell Foundation has a position in the Core Team as to facilitate ecosystem-related matters and discussion with other institutional parties.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
an employee of the Haskell Foundation has a position in the Core Team as to facilitate ecosystem-related matters and discussion with other institutional parties.
```

## Operational aspect

As an Organisation, `haskell-cryptography` concerns itself with two things:

> 1. Code production

Reviewer 3: maybe add "and maintenance" as well?

2. Services related to the code and users

### Code production

`haskell-cryptography` produces a series of projects related to cryptography.

> These projects have a referent person that is in charge of being the main point of contact, handle inquiries from the core team and act as an editor for the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each project has a referent person that is in charge of being the main point of contact, handle inquiries from the core team and act as an editor for the project.
```
```suggestion
These projects have a key person that is in charge of being the main point of contact, handle inquiries from the core team and act as an editor for the project.
```
perhaps? Not sure I like any of these words.

> This role involves making concrete the strategy of the core team, and being in charge of the management of the project,

Reviewer 3: "making concrete the strategy" seems to be a typo

> whithin the framework established by the guidelines published in the `haskell-cryptography/governance` repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
whithin the framework established by the guidelines published in the [haskell-cryptography/governance](https://github.com/haskell-cryptography/governance) repository.
```

> The referent person is  autonomous but held accountable. This doesn't prevent a decision proces that is involving multiple parties in a "flat"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The referent person is  autonomous but held accountable. This doesn't prevent a decision process that involves multiple parties in a "flat"
```

> The referent person is  autonomous but held accountable. This doesn't prevent a decision proces that is involving multiple parties in a "flat"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The referent person is  autonomous but held accountable. This doesn't prevent a decision process that is involving multiple parties in a "flat"
```

governance structure for a project, but the referent is the one person that is in charge of making these decisions official, answering for them and enforcing them.

> 

Reviewer: So what is the relationship of the _Core Team_ and the _referent people_ for the projects? It's not clear

Author: So, I wrote 

> This role involves making concrete the strategy of the core team, and being in charge of the management of the project, within the framework established by the guidelines published in the haskell-cryptography/governance repository.

In simplistic terms, this would be a subjugation relationship? But I think this implies no agency whatsoever, so it's the wrong term.

What I'm trying to say is that the Core Team establishes a strategy (improve the usability and quality of cryptography toolkits in the ecosystem, collaborate with industrial users to better answer their needs, something like that), and the persons that are referent for projects should aim to enact this strategy at their level, and they can ask for resources from the Core Team (for example, provide with a list of industrial users' needs, get in-kind donations from companies, etc).

Author: @axman6 Could you take a look again? I hope I've clarified the situation?

Reviewer 4: This looks good, nice change.

Author: I've taken your feedback into account. I'll let you formally approve or request changes from the GH interface when you have time. :)

# Governance

`haskell-cryptography` (herein referred to as the "Organisation") is a GitHub organisation that aims to provide a support structure to open-source maintainers producing projects wrapping or implementing cryptography.

The Organisation has the following goals:

* Prevent situations where too few people are supporting critical projects for the ecosystem.
* Prevent having a closed group of people having too much control over every aspect of a project.
* To encourage and support part-time and occasional contributors to the projects.
* To ensure continuity and stability through documentation, testing and benchmarking.

> * To listen to the needs of the community and industrial users, and lowering the barrier to industrial adoption.

Reviewer 5: 'and lower'

* To ensure that current security practices are easy for others and maintained within the ecosystem.

> * To ensure timely updates are published in the community package repository, like Hackage.

Reviewer 5: 'in community package repositories, such as Hackage.'

> A security flaw is discovered by researchers and we need to urgently upgrade a project, in a possibly breaking way.

> A bug fix has been approved and merged, but not released.

---

This document elaborates on administrative and operational aspects of the Organisation, designed to serve and fullfill these goals as a priority.

## Administrative aspect

The Organisation's administrative aspects are handled by the Core Team. The Core team are also contributors to projects.

### Bylaws

1. Core Team members are expected to do various kind of tasks, from code contributions to handling administrative and interpersonal aspects.
2. Core Team members are expected to be available long-term. If this becomes impossible, the other Core Team members may have to temporarily or permanently take over the work of the member who is absent.
3. Core Team members may be required to do work when needed, especially in the case of security issues, compiler upgrades, etc.
4. The Core Team has no fixed number of seats, the number varies according to the needs of the Organisation.

> The non-Core Team contributors are not bound to these bylaws. Non-Core Team contributors can make infrequent contributions, not maintain extended presence and are not subject to working on-demand.

Reviewer 5: 'not bound by these bylaws'

### Selection process

> To be a part of the Core Team, the candidate needs to have a history of contributing to the projects hosted by the Organisation

Reviewer 5: This needs a full stop at the end, then a space between paragraphs.

An Interim Core Team will be formed from an initial pool of volunteers.

### Substitutions and Replacements

Substitutions: Stepping-up for a fixed period of time when a Core Team member cannot fulfill their role;

> Replacement: Being a permanent replacement for a Core Team member;

Reviewer 5: Is this section meant to be longer? It seems to be missing a lot of detail.

# Governance

> `haskell-cryptography` (herein referred to as the "Organisation") is a GitHub organisation that aims to provide a support structure to open-source maintainers producing cryptography projects.

Reviewer 5: Does 'cryptography projects' mean 'projects wrapping/implementing cryptography' or 'projects using cryptography'? Might want to make this clear.

The Organisation has the following goals:

* Prevent situations where too few people are supporting critical projects for the ecosystem.

> * Prevent having a closed group of people having too much control over every aspect of a project.

Reviewer 5: This is a bit too broad. I assume by 'a project' you meant 'a project that's ecosystemically-critical, requires consensus, etc'?

> * To encourage and support part-time, niche contributors to the projects.

Reviewer 5: You might want to spell out the usage of 'niche' here. Something like:

"To encourage and support part-time contributors, and contributors of more niche functionality to the projects."

Although I'm not sure even that's quite right.

* To ensure continuity and stability through documentation, testing and benchmarking.
* To listen to the needs of the community and industrial users, and lowering the barrier to industrial adoption.

> * To ensure that current security practices are easy for others and maintained whithin the ecosystem.

Reviewer 5: 'within'

> * To ensure timely update in the community package repository

Reviewer 5: By which I assume you mean Hackage? If so, better say it, or at least list as an example. Also, 'timely updates'.

> Examples of situations that we aim to remediate to:

Reviewer 5: Better to say '...to avoid:'.

> A single maintainer doing all the “boring work” suddenly becomes unavailable for reasons outside of the project.

> > A large number of people requesting a fix or feature not being listened to for personal disagreements with the core maintenance team.

Reviewer 5: 'listened to due to personal disagreements...'

> > Somebody wanting to contribute a feature but not knowing where to begin, how to approach it, because it is not explained anywhere.

Reviewer 5: '... begin, or how to ...'

> > A pull-request lands which creates massive performance regression when compiled with `-O2`, affecting a large number of downstream users.

Reviewer 5: I don't believe 'pull request' requires hyphenation.

> > Losing adoption opportunities because the most popular options are too entrenched and are maintained by stubborn people.

Reviewer 5: Maybe 'stubborn' needs some elaboration, or a more specific term?

> A security flaw is discovered by researchers and we need to urgently upgrade a project, in a possibly breaking way.

> > A bug fix has been approved, merged, but not released.

Reviewer 5: 'approved and merged, but not released.'.

---

This document elaborates on administrative and operational aspects of the Organisation, designed to serve and fullfill these goals as a priority.

## Administrative aspect

The Organisation's administrative aspects are handled by the Core Team. The Core team are also contributors to projects.

### Bylaws

1. Core Team members are expected to do various kind of tasks, from code contributions to handling administrative and interpersonal aspects.

> 2. Core Team members are expected to be available long-term, and it if it's not the case, the other Core Team members may temporarily or permanently reassign their position.

Reviewer 5: Splitting this into two sentences is a bit clearer, especially because the second half is a bit vague. Maybe something like:

"Core Team members are expected to be available long-term. If this becomes impossible, the other Core Team members may have to temporarily or permanently take over the work of the member who is absent."

3. Core Team members may be required to do work when needed, especially in the case of security issues, compiler upgrades, etc.
4. The Core Team has no fixed number of seats, the number varies according to the needs of the Organisation.

> The non-Core Team contributors are not bound to these items. Non-Core Team contributors can make infrequent contributions, not maintain extended presence and are not subject to working on-demand.

Reviewer 5: 'bound to these bylaws'.

### Selection process

To be a part of the Core Team, the candidate needs to have a history of contributing to the projects hosted by the Organisation

> An Interim Core Team will be formed from an initial pool of volunteers.

Reviewer 5: Combine these into one paragraph.

### Substitutions and Replacements

Substitutions: Stepping-up for a fixed period of time when a Core Team member cannot fulfill their role;

Replacement: Being a permanent replacement for a Core Team member;

## Operational aspect

As an Organisation, `haskell-cryptography` concerns itself with two things:

1. Code production and maintenance
2. Services related to the code and users

### Code production

`haskell-cryptography` produces a series of projects related to cryptography.
Each project has a key person that is the main point of contact for the project,

> handle inquiries from the core team and act as a leading force for the project,

Reviewer 5: 'handles', 'acts'.

proving feedback on submitted code and setting directions.

This role involves enacting the goals of the Organisation, and being in charge of the management of the project,

> whithin the framework established by the guidelines published in the [haskell-cryptography/governance](https://github.com/haskell-cryptography/governance) repository.

Reviewer 5: 'within'

# Governance

`haskell-cryptography` (herein referred to as the "Organisation") is a GitHub organisation that aims to provide a support structure to open-source maintainers producing cryptography projects.

The Organisation has the following goals:

> * Prevent situations where too few people are supporting too critical projects for the ecosystem.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Prevent situations where too few people are supporting critical projects for the ecosystem.
```

> * Prevent having a very closed group of people having too much control over every aspect of a project.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Prevent having a closed group of people having too much control over every aspect of a project.
```

I'm not sure this is particularly clear; we're encouraging people to cake control of projects but not too much control?

* To encourage and support part-time, niche contributors to the projects.
* To ensure continuity and stability through documentation, testing and benchmarking.
* To listen to the needs of the community and industrial users, and lowering the barrier to industrial adoption.

> * To ensure that current security practices are easy for others and maintained whithin the ecosystem.

Reviewer 4: I wouldn't mind seeing something about _timely updates_ being a goal, it's all well and good that PRs have been merged but also getting them released is important. (I say this as someone who's terrible at getting releases out)

Examples of situations that we aim to remediate to:

> A single maintainer doing all the “boring work” suddenly becomes unavailable for reasons outside of the project.

> A large number of people requesting a fix or feature not being listened to for personal disagreements with the core maintenance team.

> Somebody wanting to contribute a feature but not knowing where to begin, how to approach it, because it is not explained anywhere.

> A pull-request lands which creates massive performance regression when compiled with `-O2`, affecting a large number of downstream users.

> Losing adoption opportunities because the most popular options are too entrenched and are maintained by stubborn people.

> A security flaw is discovered by researchers and we need to urgently upgrade a project, in a possibly breaking way.

---

This document elaborates on administrative and operational aspects of the Organisation, designed to serve and fullfill these goals as a priority.

## Administrative aspect

The Organisation's administrative aspects are handled by the Core Team. The Core team are also contributors to projects.

### Bylaws

> 1. Core Team members are expected to do various kind of tasks (not niche things)

Reviewer 4: This is very vague

> 2. Core Team members are expected to be available long-term, and it if it's not the case, they are to be substituted or replaced

Reviewer 4: This might need to be made more concrete too. 
```suggestion
2. Core Team members are expected to be available long-term, and it if it's not the case, the other Core Team members may temporarily or permanently reassign their position.
```
I don't like this wording either, but it any least says what the mechanism is.

> 3. Core Team members may be required to do work when needed.

Reviewer 4: Outrageous! 😁  I think this also needs more detail, all this says is that someone on the Core Team is expected to do at least one piece of work.

4. The Core Team has no fixed number of seats, the number varies according to the needs of the Organisation.

> The non-Core Team contributors are not bound to these items. Non-Core Team contributors can make infrequent contributions, not maintain extended presence and not subject to working on-demand.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The non-Core Team contributors are not bound to these items. Non-Core Team contributors can make infrequent contributions, not maintain extended presence and are not subject to working on-demand.
```

### Selection process

To be a part of the Core Team, the candidate needs to have a history of contributing to the projects hosted by the Organisation

An Interim Core Team will be formed from an initial pool of volunteers.

### Substitutions and Replacements

Substitutions: Stepping-up for a fixed period of time when a Core Team member cannot fulfill their role;

Replacement: Being a permanent replacement for a Core Team member;

## Operational aspect

As an Organisation, `haskell-cryptography` concerns itself with two things:

1. Code production and maintenance
2. Services related to the code and users

### Code production

`haskell-cryptography` produces a series of projects related to cryptography.

> Each project has a key person that is in charge of being the main point of contact,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Each project has a key person that is the main point of contact for the project,
```

> handle inquiries from the core team and act as an editor for the project.

Reviewer 4: Editor is as slightly confusing choice of words here; I assume it's meant in the sense of a newspaper editor, who isn't necessarily writing all the code, but is leading the direction of the project, provides feedback on submitted code etc.

Author: yes, book editor, newspaper editor

This role involves enacting the goals of the Organisation, and being in charge of the management of the project,
whithin the framework established by the guidelines published in the [haskell-cryptography/governance](https://github.com/haskell-cryptography/governance) repository.

> The referent person is  autonomous but held accountable. This doesn't prevent a decision process that involves multiple parties in a "flat"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The key person is autonomous but held accountable. This doesn't prevent a decision process that involves multiple parties in a "flat"
```
If we're making the change above.
Perhaps this is a little less scary.
```suggestion
The key person is autonomous but accountable for the project. This doesn't prevent a decision process that involves multiple parties in a "flat"
```

answering for them and enforcing them.

### Services related to the code and users

As a support structure for open-source maintainers, `haskell-cryptography` has the ability to host projects of the Haskell ecosystem related to cryptography,
should their maintainer decide that this is the best course of action for their project.
By transferring a project to the organisation, the authors of a project do not implictly relinquish their permissions, authorship and ownership
of the project, and benefit from the collaborators of the organisation to help them with tasks they need help with.

Projects can be donated for ongoing maintenance and improvement, or to seek new leadership. 
The organisation intends to allow package maintainers to maintain control of their packages, if they wish to, while making it easier to bring together effort to improve the state of cryptography in the Haskell ecosystem.
In the interest of keeping a healthy and secure ecosystem, the Core Team will have to perform some tasks on projects that were transferred to the Organisation.
These tasks may take priority over the specific ideas of the original authors of the projects.

> We acknowledge that the authors have insights that we lack and know their domains better than the Core Team may, but in the interest of the ecosystem the needs of our contributors may outweigh the ideals of the original authors. This is a flexible policy and consensus with the authors will always be preferred.

Reviewer 4: Perhaps also add something about the Core Team having access to all the projects so they can make urgent changes if the key person isn't responsive. If we had a Log4J style bug that sat sound for a few weeks because no one could make the changes that would be problematic. 

I think it would be wise to put something in here about requiring that the core team does have commit rights and can release any project in the organisation, but that those rights are supposed to only be used in urgent circumstances, and having those rights should eb a requirement for adding the project to the organisation.

Author: Yup', got it
